.. include:: ./../../../../../macros.txt
.. include:: ./../../../../../units.txt

.. _MAX1785X:

MAX1785x
========

..
    Comments:
    uphost and downhost are terms in Maxim driver to describe the communication path

.. spelling::
    uphost
    downhost

This module supports the `MAX17852` and `MAX17853` monitoring ICs by Maxim
Integrated.
Communication with these ICs is handled through a `MAX17841B` bridge IC.
The communication between bridge IC and monitoring IC is encoded
as Maxim Battery Management UART, which is a optimized, differential variant
of UART with a focus on robustness.

A typical setup consists of one master unit with one to two bridge ICs and
several monitoring ICs in a daisy-chain. The current implementation of the
driver supports communication through one bridge IC (the "uphost path"), but
the hardware supports a redundant approach by adding read only communication on
the "downhost path".

Driver structure
----------------

The driver is separated into three main modules with additional helper modules.
The three main modules are:

  * MAX17841B bridge IC driver that interacts with the interface
    from :ref:`INTERFACE_MAX17841B___V1_0_0__` in ``mxm_17841b.c``,
  * Battery Management UART protocol abstraction in
    ``max_battery_management.c`` and
  * MAX1785x device driver in ``mxm_1785x.c``.
  * Implementation of the operation state machine in ``mxm_17852.c``.
    This implementation is selected by the driver variant in ``bms.json``.


Configuration
-------------

The driver for the |mxm| monitoring ICs is configurable for some aspects.

Adaption to new hardware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to adapt the driver to new interface hardware, it is necessary to
adapt the following:

  * Ensure that the functions that interact with the shutdown pin of
    the |max17841b| bridge IC are correct.
    They are implemented in ``mxm_cfg.c``.
  * Check the |spi| configuration of the system and that it aligns with
    the capabilities of the bridge IC.
  * The driver is intended to be implemented as generic as possible.
    That means that the main modules should not be necessary to be changed.
    In order to implement new behavior during the measurement cycle the
    implementation of the ``MXM_StateMachineOperation`` has to be adapted.
    This can be achieved by implementing a new variant in parallel to the
    current ``max17852`` variant.

.. _Startup_behavior:

Startup behavior
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

During enumeration of the daisy-chain, the monitoring driver can stop and hang
if the number of found devices does not match the expected number of devices
as reported by the system configuration.
In order to select whether the driver should hang or continue, the constant
``mxm_allowSkippingPostInitSelfCheck`` can be set.

Main flow
---------

The following flow chart describes the main flow of this ``AFE`` driver.

.. mermaid::

   stateDiagram-v2
      uninitialized: Uninitialized
      pre_init: Pre-Initialization Self Check
      init: Initialization
      post_init: Post-Initialization Self Check
      idle: Idle
      operation: Operation

      [*] --> uninitialized
      uninitialized --> pre_init: Initialization
      pre_init --> init: Success
      init --> post_init: Success
      post_init --> idle: Success
      idle --> operation: Operation Requested
      operation --> idle: Halt Requested
      operation --> uninitialized: Error
      pre_init --> uninitialized: Error
      init --> uninitialized: Error
      post_init --> uninitialized: Error

      state operation {
          op_init: Initialization of AFE
          op_mux_control: Multiplexer control
          op_measurement: Measurement
          op_diagnostic: Diagnostic measures
          op_balancing: Balancing control

          [*] --> op_init
          op_init --> op_mux_control
          op_mux_control --> op_measurement
          op_measurement --> op_diagnostic
          op_diagnostic --> op_balancing
          op_balancing --> op_mux_control
      }

* State `Unitialized`: This is the default state of the driver.
  The driver transitions with the next execution into the
  `Pre-Initialization Self Check` state.

* State `Pre-Initialization Self Check`: In this state, the driver checks
  assumptions on its functions.
  If this step fails, the driver is not able to conclude its work.

* State `Initialization`: In this state, the daisy-chain of the driver is
  initialized and each ``AFE`` is assigned an address.

* State `Post-Initialization Self Check`: During this state, the number of
  found ``AFE`` is compared to the expected number of devices.
  If these mismatch the driver can halt in this state depending on the
  configuration described in :ref:`Startup_behavior`.

* State `Idle`: The driver rests in this state as long as the system requests
  the driver to start.

* State `Operation`: This is the main state during which the ``AFE`` devices
  are controlled.

  * State `Initialization of AFE`: In this chain of substates the ``AFE`` is
    initialized and programmed with the expected configuration.

  * State `Multiplexer control`: In this chain of substates the temperature
    multiplexer of the |slave| is controlled and switched to the next channel.

  * State `Measurement`: In this chain of substates the measurement the driver
    requests a measurement and retrieves each measurement value.

  * State `Diagnostic measures`: In this chain of substates diagnostic
    registers are read.
    When a power on reset condition is recognized (indicating a loss of power
    and potentially undefined state in one of the ``AFE`` devices), a reset of
    the driver is triggered.

  * State `Balancing control`: In this chain of substates the balancing
    switches are controlled.
    The driver alternates between even and odd switches in order to not create
    a connection between adjacent switches.

* If any state except `Idle` or `Unitialized` is stuck and does not advance to
  the next state during a predefined time frame, the driver resets itself to
  the `Uninitialized` state.
  Requests for operation are preserved during this reset as the system assumes
  that the driver has been already asked to start.

Diagnostic signals generated
----------------------------

This driver uses the following diagnostic messages of the ``diag``-module:

* ``DIAG_ID_AFE_CONFIG``: This signal is issued when the self check of the
  driver that is executed before the initialization fails.
  If this happens, it is very likely due to an implementation error.
* ``DIAG_ID_AFE_COM_INTEGRITY``: This signal is issued when the CRC of a
  received message is not correct.
* ``DIAG_ID_AFE_SPI``: This signal is issued when the SPI API returns an
  unsuccessful transmission.
  If this happens, it is very likely due to implementation issues with the
  ``SPI`` interface.
  Normally, the ``SPI`` transmission functions should succeed.

Trivia
------

This section gathers additional information that is worth knowing about the
implementation.

String mapping
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The driver assumes, that it has to service all strings in the system and that
all strings are connected into one daisy-chain.
(It expects a chain of strings of modules.)

If only one string is defined, the driver maps the modules onto this string as
expected.
If more than one string is defined, the driver maps the modules by filling the
first string, then filling the second and so forth.
This behavior is not configurable.

Automatic reset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a communication issue occurs, the slave boards might get stuck in a state
that is unknown to the |master|.
In order to prevent this situation, the driver has an error counter.
This error counter is automatically reset after
`MXM_TIMEOUT_RESET_ERROR_COUNTER_ms` milliseconds without any new error.
If the error threshold of `MXM_MAXIMUM_ERROR_COUNT` is passed, the driver
starts an automatic reset of the whole daisy-chain.

This is achieved by pulling down the shutdown line of the bridge IC,
effectively resetting it to default condition.
During this shutdown, the |slave| will go into deep sleep and thus loose their
non-persistent configuration (and also disable the on-board supply).
The driver resets itself to initial condition restores flags indicating whether
it may start and then restart the daisy-chain.
The user can register this by checking for the freshness of measurement values.
